SHIMMER(1)            User Contributed Perl Documentation           SHIMMER(1)

NAME
       shimmer.pl - call somatic single base changes from matched tumor and normal next gen-
       eration sequences.

SYNOPSIS
       Tally counts of alleles in two BAM files, and write out data for sites with unexpect-
       edly large deviations in allele frequencies, controlling the false discovery rate
       (FDR) using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure:

         shimmer.pl [options] <normal_bam_file> <tumor_bam_file> --ref <ref_fasta_file>

       Run shimmer.pl -man for a detailed description of options and the output files.

DESCRIPTION
       The script creates a randomly named directory (run_shimmer_XXXXXX) in the user's cur-
       rent working directory, and reads through the two BAM files provided as options with
       samtools mpileup, recording the normal sample's genotype, as well as the counts of the
       two most frequently seen alleles at each site.  It then uses the R "statmod" library
       to calculate p-values with the Fisher's exact test on each site where a minimum
       threshold of alternate allele copies are seen (see --min_som_reads option).

       Once all p-values have been calculated, shimmer.pl uses the Benjamini-Hochberg proce-
       dure to report only changes with a false discovery rate below the specified maximum
       FDR (see --max_q option).  The single-nucleotide variants are reported in VarSifter
       and VCF formats in the files "somatic_diffs.vs" and "somatic_diffs.vcf", respectively.

INPUT
       The first and second arguments to shimmer are the paths of two BAM-formatted files of
       aligned sequencing reads.  These files must be sorted using samtools prior to running
       shimmer, and indexed if the --region option wil be used.

       The path of a valid, fasta-formatted file for the reference sequence must be passed
       with the option --ref.  This fasta file must have a corresponding samtools index file
       with the same name except for an appended ".fai" if the --region option will be used.

OPTIONS
       --region chr or
       --region chr:start-end
            This option specifies a region as a reference entry (chromosome), optionally fol-
            lowed by a position range, and causes the program to limit somatic call to only
            that region.  By default, the program calls variants in all regions that covered
            by reads in both BAM files.

       --ref reference_fasta_file
            This option specifies the reference file to which the reads in the BAM files were
            aligned.  It is a required option.

       --minqual min_base_quality_score
            This option specifies a minimum phred quality score to be required for read bases
            to be included in the counts for the Fisher's exact tests.  By default, all bases
            are included.

       --mapqual min_mapping_quality_score
            This option specifies a minimum mapping quality score to be required for all reads
            to be included in the counts for the Fisher's exact tests.  By default, all reads'
            bases are included.

       --max_q max_acceptable_FDR
            This option specifies the maximum FDR level to be set for the Benjamini-Hochberg
            procedure for multiple testing correction.

       --annovardb path_to_annovar_db_directory
            This option allows the user to specify an ANNOVAR database directory against
            which to annotate variants (see Wang et al, "ANNOVAR: functional annotations of
            genetic variants from high-throughput sequencing data". Nucl. Acids Res. 38,
            2010).

       --buildver <hg18, hg19, etc.>
            This option is passed directly to ANNOVAR.

       --annovar path_to_annovar
            This option allows the user to specify a particular path to the "annotate_vari-
            ants.pl" script from ANNOVAR.  As a default, if the annovardb option has been
            specified (see above), Shimmer will call the first copy of "annotate_varia-
            tion.pl" in the user's path.

OUTPUT
       The single nucleotide variants (sSNVs) are written in both VarSifter and VCF formats.

       The fields in the VarSifter file (see Teer et al., "VarSifter: Visualizing and analyz-
       ing exome-scale sequence variation data on a desktop computer".  Bioinformatics 28,
       2012) are as follows:

       Index
            A numerical identifier for each variant.

       Chr  The entry name of the reference sequence in the BAM files and reference fasta
            file.

       LeftFlank
            Position one base to the left of the variant base.

       RightFlank
            Position one base to the right of the variant base.

       ref_allele
            Reference base.

       var_allele
            Variant base.

       muttype
            Type of mutation.  In this version of shimmer.pl, all variants are of type "SNP".
            Future versions of shimmer.pl will also call somatic variants of type "INDEL".

       normal_covg
            Number of reads covering this position in the normal BAM file.  If the --minqual
            option has been used, only reads with the required base quality at this position
            will be counted.

       tumor_covg
            Number of reads covering this position in the tumor BAM file.  If the --minqual
            option has been used, only reads with the required base quality at this position
            will be counted.

       normal_ratio
            Ratio of reads with the alternate base to total reads covering this position in
            the normal BAM file.  If the --minqual option has been used, only reads with the
            required base quality at this position will be counted.

       tumor_ratio
            Ratio of reads with the alternate base to total reads covering this position in
            the tumor BAM file.  If the --minqual option has been used, only reads with the
            required base quality at this position will be counted.

       q_value
            The expected value of the false discovery rate if all variants with q_value val-
            ues higher than this value were excluded.

       The VCF file conforms to the standards in VCFv4.0, but doesn't include as much infor-
       mation as the VarSifter file does.  In particular, for each somatic SNV predicted, it
       reports the reference and alternate allele, the q-value (as described above in the
       VarSifter file description), and the genotype (always 0/0 for the normal and 0/1 for
       the tumor) and depth of coverage for each sample.  Suggestions are welcome for how to
       best utilize VCF format for these data, as it's a work in progress!

AUTHOR
        Nancy F. Hansen - nhansen@mail.nih.gov

LEGAL
       This software/database is "United States Government Work" under the terms of the
       United States Copyright Act.  It was written as part of the authors' official duties
       for the United States Government and thus cannot be copyrighted.  This soft-
       ware/database is freely available to the public for use without a copyright notice.
       Restrictions cannot be placed on its present or future use.

       Although all reasonable efforts have been taken to ensure the accuracy and reliability
       of the software and data, the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) and the
       U.S. Government does not and cannot warrant the performance or results that may be
       obtained by using this software or data.  NHGRI and the U.S.  Government disclaims all
       warranties as to performance, merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose.

       In any work or product derived from this material, proper attribution of the authors
       as the source of the software or data should be made, using "NHGRI Genome Technology
       Branch" as the citation.

perl v5.8.8                       2012-10-27                        SHIMMER(1)

